---
title: "The Ending of Mark 16"
layout: post
tags: [seminary]
category: post
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Robert Bernard's Greek Syntax and Exegesis II class at Southwestern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: "This is a contrived pastoral letter to a concerned member who discovered a footnote in his Bible pointing to a debate over the longer ending of Mark 16:9–20 and introduces to him the field of textual criticism."
description: "This is a contrived pastoral letter to a concerned member who discovered a footnote in his Bible pointing to a debate over the longer ending of Mark 16:9–20 and introduces to him the field of textual criticism."
keywords: [Mark, "Mark 16", Alexandrian, Western, Caesarean, Byzantine, Koine, "textual criticism", "textual tradition"]
---

Bert,

I know it must feel shocking to find out that an entire passage of
Scripture is of a dubious nature. We must remember, however, that the
Bible we have today did not fall out of the sky as a nice-and-neat
leather-bound, fully complete KJV (or NIV). No, in fact, the New
Testament is a collection of writings dating from nearly 2000 years ago
(and the Old Testament is even older.)

In light of this, let’s consider the physical documents of these letters
and accounts. Many of the documents were written on papyri, which is
akin to thick paper. How long do you imagine paper can last? If I
transcribe this conversation with you today, print it out, and hand it
to you—do you think it will still exist in 2000 years? I doubt it.
Amazingly, we do have access to some very early fragments of
manuscripts, some even from the second and third centuries! As early as
the fourth century, manuscripts were also copied onto parchment (animal
skin); these manuscripts have had a considerably better survival rate.
Can you imagine the providence necessary for these documents to remain
to this day? God has been so good to us by preserving even these early
manuscripts.

Not only were these manuscripts stored on paper or parchment, they were
each hand-copied. The early church couldn’t print a million copies of
the Bible each year; every copy was tediously crafted by scribes. In
fact, much of the problem you are having with Mark 16 was introduced by
these scribes. As scribes copied the text they would make unintentional
(and sometimes intentional) changes to the manuscripts. These changes
might be additions, omissions, transpositions, or substitutions. If the
changes were made intentionally, those changes were attempts, from the
scribe’s perspective, to improve upon the manuscript on hand. While the
unintentional changes were generally small—just a word or two—the
intentional changes were sometimes substantial, even covering entire
passages, as we see in Mark 16.[^1] Once these changes were made, many
of them were perpetuated by even more scribes, who assumed the
manuscript they were citing was accurate. However, because changes were
made at different times, in different locations, on different
manuscripts, scholars have been able to generally categorize the
manuscripts into four different families: Alexandrian, Ceasarean,
Western, and Byzantine/Koine. I will briefly describe each one for your
benefit.

### Alexandrian

Considered to be the earliest accurate family, the Alexandrian text is
thought by many to be as close to the original writings of the New
Testament as we have. This family, therefore, is also considered to be
the most important family of manuscripts. One popular manuscript in the
Alexandrian family is the Codex Sinaiticus which dates to the fourth
century and includes all of the New Testament and half of the Old
Testament. The Codex Vaticanus, which was also written in the fourth
century, contains most of both testaments, and is considered a rival in
quality to the Sinaiticus.

### Western

This family of texts may be traced back to the second century, but its
preservation is disputed because of its numerous variations not found
elsewhere. It may, however serve to preserve the oral tradition of the
early church.

### Caesarean

The Ceasearean family is thought to be a combination of the Alexandrian
and Western texts. The best known manuscript from this family is the
Codex Washingtonianus, a collection of the four gospels which was
written in the fifth century.

### Byzantine / Koine

The final family is called both the Koine and Byzantine text. While this
family has the most manuscripts of the four, it appears to also be a
combination of the other families. Notably, the Textus Receptus
manuscript —which is part of this family—was a primary source in the
translation of the King James Version. Another important manuscript was
the Codex Alexandrinus, from the fifth century.

Bert, I am describing these families in order to properly introduce to
you the field of *textual criticism*. Put simply, textual criticism is a
system of manuscript comparison with the goal of establishing original
authenticity. Christian scholars have put great effort into the field of
textual criticism because, as you are now aware, all extant manuscripts
have some transcription errors. However, because of the study of textual
criticism, we have the ability to estimate the original text with fair
accuracy. By using the sound rules of textual criticism, scholars have
been able to bring us closer and closer to the original text over the
years.

For your particular concern with Mark 16, we must consider manuscripts,
ancient witnesses and writing style. First, the NIV has a note following
Mark 16:8 because textual criticism has shown that what we know as Mark
16:9-20 was likely not part of the original gospel. We know this in a
fairly straight-forward manner because the earliest manuscripts of Mark
do not include these verses; they are only found in later manuscripts.
The NIV’s reference to “some other ancient witnesses” includes the
church father Eusebius, who documented the New Testament in the third
century and Jerome, of the fourth century.

Even though the NIV committee found the Mark 16 ending dubious, verses
9–20 were published because they are important to Christian tradition.
Interestingly, there are actually four endings to Mark found in the
ancient manuscripts, with verses 9-20 being the most frequent ending.
The fact that there are four unique endings to this gospel should cause
us to carefully consider the legitimacy of each. What seems noteworthy,
however, is that Mark 16:8 seems like an awkward place to end the
gospel. The fact that the earliest manuscripts stopped at verse 8, and
later manuscripts added three different endings, leads us to the
following options: (1) Mark intentionally ended his gospel after verse
8, (2) the original ending of Mark’s gospel was unfinished or lost, or
(3) the ending of Mark was purposefully left out of the earliest
manuscripts, but was re-added in the later (but still early)
manuscripts. Bert, because you are inclined to keep verses 9–20, let us
consider option 3 together. This option is speculative in nature—there
is no evidence of a re-addition—however, to properly consider this
option, we must look at the text itself. Bruce Metzger has done
significant work in the field of New Testament textual criticism. He has
found that the 12 verses at the end of Mark include 9 words or phrases
not used elsewhere in the entire book of Mark. Other analyses of the
Greek have convinced Metzger that the “vocabulary and style of verses
9-20 are non-Markan.”[^2] Other rules of textual criticism also affirm
that verses 9-20 were not in the original writing of Mark. Options 1 and
2 are equally debated; there is no firm conclusion on whether 16:8 was
the intentional or unintentional ending of Mark’s gospel. There does
seem to be consensus, however, that Mark’s originally distributed
manuscript did, in fact, end at 16:8.

Bert, I want to reaffirm to you our belief in the inerrancy and
authority of Scripture. We hold to a strong conviction of *verbal
plenary inspiration*—that all of the words of the biblical writers were
inspired (breathed out) by God. Yet, you are wise to ask how this
applies when we no longer have the original words penned by the New
Testament writers. Consider this: even if we had the original Greek
manuscripts, our English bible would still be a secondary translation
from the original language. Even though it is through a translation
mediated by biblical scholars, we believe that the English versions of
the Bible provide the full, authoritative counsel of Scripture. A
blessing of textual criticism is that it has allowed us to form an even
clearer picture of the original Greek manuscripts. The only reason Mark
16 provides such a problem is because the traditional scholarship of the
Church was not able to recognize the nature of Mark’s ending; thus, the
text was included for generations. Without that history, modern
translations would, undoubtedly, leave the passage out altogether. So,
in addition to believing the original words were divinely inspired, we
also believe that God has providentially provided us with accurate
means—through manuscripts and scholarship—to have fully authoritative
translations of the Bible.

In conclusion, I want to encourage you to not lose heart in the words
God has provided us through preservation, tradition, and scholarship.
God has given his Word to us in words that we understand so that we may
know him and heed his full counsel. With all my heart, I exhort you to
remember and live by the Word that God has given you.

_Sola scriptura_,  
Pastor PJ

[^1]: Gordon D. Fee, *New Testament Exegesis: Third edition* (Westminster John Knox Press, 2002), pp. 59--61

[^2]: Bruce Metzger, *A Textual Commentary on the Greek New Testament* (Stuttgart, 1971), pp. 122--126.
