---
title: "The Drama of Scripture, by Craig Bartholomew and Michael Goheen"
layout: post
category: reviews
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Chris Hlavacek's Old Testament II class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: "<cite>The Drama of Scripture: Finding Our Place in the Biblical Story</cite>. By Craig G. Bartholomew and Michael W. Goheen. Second Edition. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2014, 272 pp. (6374 locations), $12.99 Kindle."
rating: "4 / 5"
buy:
    amazon: 0801049563
image:
    feature: /reviews/drama-of-scripture.jpg
description: "_The Drama of Scripture_ is a compelling introductory narrative of the Bible. Bartholomew and Goheen succeed in their goal of explaining that Scripture is the true story of God in the world."
keywords: ["Craig Bartholomew", "Michael Goheen", Bible, Scripture, drama, story, narrative, introduction, "book review"]
---

Craig Bartholomew and Michael Goheen write _The Drama of Scripture_ in order to introduce readers to the narrative of the Bible. Conceived as a textbook for a freshman-level university course in biblical theology, this book retells the contents of the Bible as one cohesive and coherent narrative. Thus, it introduces readers to both the content of the Bible and the particular interpretation of the text as a drama.

Bartholomew and Goheen collaborate on this book to achieve a combined focus on biblical scholarship and missiological studies. Bartholomew, who obtained his doctorate at the University of Bristol, is a Professor of Philosophy at Redeemer University College, as well as the principal of the Paideia Centre for Public Theology, and Michael Goheen, whose doctorate comes from the University of Utrecht, is a Professor of Missiology at Calvin Theological Seminary, the Director of Theological Education at the Missional Training Center, and a minister of preaching at New West Christian Reformed Church. In this work, the two men effectively maximize their respective backgrounds. They provide the experience required to write an accurate, missiologically focused, dramatic retelling of the Bible.

Bartholomew and Goheen's primary goal is for readers "to understand the true nature of Scripture: it is God’s story, the true story of the world" (124). Secondarily, they seek to help readers "articulate a thoroughly biblical worldview by systematically developing the most comprehensive categories of the Bible’s story line: creation, sin, and redemption" (125--126). Though an informed reader might quibble with the authors' selection of biblical stories and events, the authors are consistent in demonstrating that "every part of the Bible---each event, book, character, command, prophecy, and poem---must be understood in the context of the one story line" (134--135). The authors accomplish their goal through three emphases: "the comprehensive scope of God’s redemptive work in creation," "the believer’s own place within the biblical story," and "the centrality of mission within the biblical story" (147--154). _The Drama of Scripture_ is well suited as an introduction to the Bible in various contexts---from university classrooms to one-on-one discipleship relationships.

Bartholomew and Goheen structure _The Drama of Scripture_ along N. T. Wright's five acts of the drama of the Bible---creation, sin, Israel, Christ, and church---while adding a sixth act, the new creation. The book's chapter divisions directly correspond with these six acts. The authors retell the story of the Bible in chronological fashion within this structure, particularly emphasizing the historical narrative writings. However, before beginning the grand story of the Bible, the authors use the prologue to establish their view that the Bible is a cohesive narrative. In fact, Bartholomew and Goheen aver that humans interpret all of life within the context of a story, writing, "Our lives---the questions and events and decisions and relationships that fill it---take their meaning from within some narrative" (206--207). Thus, the Christian stands out from unbelievers in that he not only interprets his life in the context of a story, but also "believes that there is one true story: the story told in the Bible" (243--244). The authors then invite the reader "to come along with us on a journey in which the claim is made that _God is acting in history for the salvation of the world_" (285--286, emphasis original). 

Bartholomew and Goheen retell the Old Testament story by dividing its content into three acts: Creation, Fall, and Redemption Initiated. The first two acts cover the first three chapters of Genesis, while the third act summarizes the history of the nation of Israel in the rest of the Old Testament. In "Act 1: God Establishes His Kingdom---Creation," the authors establish God's identity and how he relates to his kingdom---creation in general---as well as humankind, specifically made in his image. They note, "[God] thus establishes himself as the great King over all creation, without limits of any kind, and worthy to receive all glory, honor, and power in the worship of what he has created" (404--405). In "Act 2: Rebellion in the Kingdom---Fall," Bartholomew and Goheen recount the story of humanity's fall through the sin of Adam and Eve. The authors contend that the "mysterious origin of evil in God's world . . . was rooted in the mutiny of the first human couple. They were tempted, and they succumbed, with catastrophic consequences," particularly death (546--547). 

Next is a summary of Genesis 4 through Malachi in "Act 3: The King Chooses Israel---Redemption Initiated," which focuses on God's election of Israel and his provision of a land for this nation. Keeping with the book's missiological focus, the authors note, "From the beginning God's people are to be 'missionary.' They are chosen to be a channel of blessing to others" (796). The authors describe the multiple covenants of the Old Testament---Noahic, Abrahamic, Mosaic, Davidic, and New---and how God keeps his covenant promises in order to bless the whole world through the nation of Israel. Through his covenant relationship with his chosen people, God teaches the peoples of the world how they are to relate to him and worship him. The authors point out that despite Israel's repeated covenantal failures---ultimately resulting in the people's exile to Babylon---"God has not forgotten his promise. God will renew Israel and then draw all nations to himself as he promised Abraham. . . . God's kingdom will be established over the whole earth" (1926--1927).

Before delving into the New Testament, Bartholomew and Goheen cover the intertestamental story of Israel, citing historical accounts and the deuterocanonical books. Thus, "Interlude: A Kingdom Story Waiting for an Ending---The Intertestamental Period" informs the reader of the historical context leading up to the New Testament, including Israel's distaste for their situation under Rome. In "Act 4: The Coming of the King---Redemption Accomplished," the authors retell the story of Jesus' earthly ministry as established in the four Gospels. They include further historical background in this section as well, helping situate the reader. The authors consider Jesus' ministry the "climactic episode of the great story of the Bible," (2201) because "in Jesus, the kingdom of God has come" (2210--2211)! Furthermore, pointing back to the intertestamental period, the authors explain how Jesus' role as messiah "breaks the mold of expectation" of the Palestinian Jews; he is "the crucified victim and the divine Son" who is "God's chosen one, appointed to usher in God's kingdom" (2748-2749).

After recounting Jesus' ministry, death, and resurrection, Bartholomew and Goheen proceed to the story of the early church in "Act 5: Spreading the News of the King---the Mission of the Church." This chapter covers Acts and the New Testament epistles, and is structured according to Acts 1:8---it follows the gospel and God's church from Jerusalem to the ends of the earth. Specifically, the authors communicate that "this second part of the gospel story is about the continuing mission of the exalted Christ by the agency of his Spirit to give salvation to the church and through the church to the whole world" (3178--3179). The authors focus on the ministry and teaching of Paul, whom they describe as "a missionary whose primary motive is to nourish the churches he has planted so that they become faithful witnesses to the kingdom" (3498--3499). Eventually, they invite the readers themselves "to take . . . part in that mission" (3689), offering a framework for living in God's story today---consistently living by the story while being innovative within the story. Christians are to live out this mission until the restoration of the cosmos. Accordingly, the final chapter, called "Act 6: The Return of the King---Redemption Completed," covers Revelation and other apocalyptic biblical references. Rather than handling the various interpretations of events leading up to the new heavens and the new earth, the authors emphasize that "the message of Revelation" is that "God will triumph" (3966) and that "salvation is the restoration of God’s creation on a new earth" (4021--4022).

While _The Drama of Scripture_ is a commendable work, it suffers from a number of weaknesses. For instance, while the authors claim that "Jesus's entry into human history . . . marks the climax of the biblical story" (3154--3155), Jesus' messianic entrance does not comprise the climax of this book. Although the authors occasionally refer to the Old Testament hope of a future Messiah, their emphasis on the Kingdom of God overshadows the significance of the Messiah himself. After discussing the Israelites' understanding of the Messiah, the authors write, "The image that best captured Israel’s expectation was the kingdom of God" (2132--2133). Thus, to the detriment of the story already _revealed_ through the whole of Scripture, the authors make the regrettable decision to emphasize only what the Israelites _expected_. While the Kingdom of God and the coming of the Messiah are interrelated biblical concepts, the authors could have better recounted Scripture by underscoring God's now-revealed plan rather than the former Jewish interpretation of his plan.

In addition, while generally succeeding at introducing the Bible's story to those unfamiliar with it, Bartholomew and Goheen occasionally assume familiarity with certain biblical concepts. For example, the authors often reference the resurrection of Jesus before they provide a full explanation of what that entails. This leaves the event of his resurrection feeling anti-climactic, even though "Jesus's death and resurrection form the climax of his ministry" (2230--2231). Once the authors actually explicate the resurrection, the reader can understand that "the resurrection stands at the center of the Christian faith" (3064--3065). 

Regrettably, the authors also omit several significant theological concepts in this book, including the Trinity, hell, and the authority of Scripture. Regarding the Trinity, while the authors rightly treat God the Father, Son, and Holy Spirit as co-equal and co-eternal, they never identify the one Christian God as three distinct persons. Similarly, the authors never explicitly mention hell, though they allude to it briefly in the conclusion, writing, "There is a dark side to the marvelous ending of the story---a dark side that carries a sobering warning. There will be those who are excluded from the city, those whose names are not written in the Lamb’s book of life" (4068--4069). Finally, although this book is a retelling of the story of the Bible, the authors do not establish the authority of the whole Bible; it is assumed, at best. These are grievous omissions for a book that intends to serve as an introduction to biblical theology.

To the authors' credit, in all other aspects, _The Drama of Scripture_ retells the story of the Bible in a manner that is approachable for a new student of Scripture. Bartholomew and Goheen wisely refrain from examining interpretative nuances and disputes. Furthermore, they succeed in avoiding repetition, generally explaining concepts and themes once and merely referencing them later. Thus, the book maintains a quick pace in its recapitulation of Scripture, ideal for readers across all levels.

Throughout the book, Bartholomew and Goheen serve not only beginning, but also intermediate-level students by providing helpful details. In one instance, the authors briefly note the various starting points of the Gospels---Mark starts with Jesus' baptism while John starts before creation, for example. In this way, the authors note how "each of the Gospel writers is concerned to show us that the stories he tells about Jesus’s life are to be understood as episodes taking place in the context of a much larger story" (2257--2258). Furthermore, the authors provide much relevant historical data that aid in the interpretation of Scripture, such as the different types of Judaism in New Testament Palestine and the Maccabean history of the intertestamental period.

Another strength of _The Drama of Scripture_ is that while it was conceived as an introductory text for a classroom setting, it can also be used in a discipleship context. The authors do well at keeping the mission of God and of his people at the forefront of this book. All the while, they maintain a strong emphasis on Christian discipleship. For example, they write, "As Jesus continues to teach his disciples, two themes now dominate: (1) the necessity of suffering and (2) the cost of being a disciple" (2790--2791). They continually point the reader to the cost of and call to become a disciple of Jesus and worshiper of God, and exhort the reader to participate in God's mission. In this way, this book will inspire readers to take seriously the commands of Christ and count the cost of discipleship. While the authors communicate Jesus' call for his disciples to suffer, they also emphasize the incredible reward of the renewed heavens and earth at the end of time. Therefore, this book challenges readers to consider soberly the claims of Scripture and encourages all to enter into God's grand story.

_The Drama of Scripture_ is a compelling introductory narrative of the Bible. Bartholomew and Goheen succeed in their goal of explaining that Scripture is the true story of God in the world. They effectively walk the reader through the biblical storyline, speeding up and slowing down as necessary in order to communicate its unified message. Though written for university freshmen, the text is accessible to all types of readers. Thus, despite its weaknesses, this book will serve anyone seeking an introduction to the Bible, regardless of the maturity of one’s faith.
