---
title: "As in All the Churches of the Saints, by Bobby Jamieson"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Jonathan Leeman's Local Church Doctrine & Practice class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: '"As in All the Churches of the Saints: The Consistency and Normativity of New Testament Patterns of Church Polity." By Robert B. Jamieson, III. Class paper, Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, 2010.'
description: "By addressing the normative pattern of New Testament polity, Robert Jamieson significantly enhances the argument for congregationally governed, elder led, deacon served, autonomous local churches as the biblical prescription for today's churches."
keywords: ["Bobby Jamieson", church, normative, "New Testament", Scripture, hermeneutic, polity]
published: false
---

A version of Bobby Jamieson's paper can be accessed at [9Marks.org]( http://9marks.org/article/journalall-churches-saints-why-new-testament-polity-prescriptive/).

In his unpublished paper submitted to Southern Baptist Theological Seminary, Robert Jamieson argues that the New Testament provides the norm for modern church polity. By examining the relevant texts, Jamieson asserts that one can find a pattern of polity in the New Testament, and that that pattern is the one to which today's churches should adhere. The author identifies the normative polity of the New Testament as a local church that is governed by the congregation, led by multiple elders, and served by multiple deacons. Jamieson argues against both scholars who discern no pattern in the New Testament and those who claim such a pattern should not be the modern standard. Both implicitly and explicitly, the author critiques other forms of church government, such as episcopalianism and presbyterianism.

One must give Jamieson credit for his cordial portrayal of his opponents in this paper. He lets them speak for themselves by citing representative New Testament scholars. The author does not appear to misrepresent his contenders, but argues with them directly. First, he demonstrates their assumptions are incorrect by mapping the New Testament evidence of a normative church polity, identifying the unique roles of apostle, elder, deacon, and the congregation as a whole. Then, Jamieson invalidates his opponents' arguments by examining the previously mapped evidence. By treating his opponents fairly, Jamieson enhances his own argument by allowing his ideas to stand on their own.

Notably, Jamieson disputes with D. A. Carson and others about the use of the Greek _ekklesia_, "church", in the New Testament. Regarding city churches such as the Church of Jerusalem, Carson avers that the use of the singular "church" must refer to multiple congregations in that city because it would be "impolitic" to meet together each week. However, Jamieson methodically cites the texts that describe how a city church would come together regularly as a church, but then meet together in smaller groups throughout the week. By demonstrating that "the Christians in Jerusalem, Antioch, and Corinth did in fact assemble as one congregation in each city," Jamieson nullifies the argument that the New Testament norm allows for multi-site churches. Although that particular argument is not especially prominent in this paper, it is perhaps the author's most significant contribution to the broader debate of New Testament polity, especially for those who are already convinced of free church congregationalism.

After Jamieson identifies a consistent pattern for New Testament polity, he finally disputes with those who, like Millard Erickson, believe that the described polity of the New Testament is not normative for the church today. However, Jamieson rightly points out that no known scholars "see a consistent, unified pattern and yet argue that it is not binding today." That is, those who believe that the New Testament does not prescribe a normative polity also believe that the New Testament does not describe a consistent polity. Thus, by establishing a consistent polity throughout the New Testament, Jamieson's paper turns the table on his opponents, requiring that they "think twice before simply setting it aside."

By addressing the normative pattern of New Testament polity, Robert Jamieson significantly enhances the argument for congregationally governed, elder led, deacon served, autonomous local churches as the biblical prescription for today's churches. Inasmuch as Jamieson's argument is correct, churches that follow other forms of polity fall short of the New Testament standard. Given that other ecclesial governments have little biblical grounding, opponents ought to carefully consider Jamieson's argument. If there is a normative pattern of church polity in the New Testament, then one's own obedience to God demands adherence to the prescribed practice.
