---
title: "The Local Church"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Jonathan Leeman's Local Church Doctrine & Practice class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: "What is the local church?"
description: "A local church is a group of gospel-believers that periodically gather in the name of Jesus in order to proclaim the gospel and exercise the keys of the kingdom of heaven."
keywords: ["local church", ecumenical, parachurch, heresy, gospel, ecclesiology, gospel, bind, loose, "keys of the kingdom"]
published: false
---

In order to answer adequately the question, "What is the local church?" one ought to accommodate at least three restrictions. First, one's definition must not allow for any heretical groups who wrongly claim the name of Christ, such as Mormons and Jehovah's Witnesses. Second, one's definition ought not to include groups of Christians that are distinctly not churches---namely, parachurch organizations. Third, one's definition ought to affirm all Christian churches as churches, despite any deficiencies in the practice of the marks of a church. In sum, I will attempt to make my definition broad enough to be ecumenical yet narrow enough to reject non-churches and heretical groups.

Twice in the Gospel of Matthew, Jesus talks about the church. In these two passages, he commissions the church with the keys of the kingdom of heaven that give the authority to bind and loose (Matt. 16:16--19; 18:18--20). Within these commissioning texts, one can glean the core definition of a local church. I substantively derive my definition for a local church from Jesus' normative description of one in Matthew.

In the first commissioning passage, Peter pronounces to Jesus, "'You are the Christ, the Son of the Living God.' And Jesus answered him, 'Blessed are you, Simon Bar-Jonah! For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my Father who is in heaven'" (Matt. 16:16--17).[^esv] Following Peter's confession, Jesus commissions Peter and the church to be heavenly ambassadors on earth. Both the confession and the confessor are the rock upon which Jesus will build his church. Therefore, whatever else is required of a church, it must be a body built upon this confession of Peter. Every local church must be able to profoundly proclaim, "Jesus is the Christ, the Son of the Living God." In order to be a church, a group must preach and believe the gospel.

[^esv]: Unless otherwise specified, all Scripture references are from the English Standard Version (ESV).

In the second commissioning passage, Jesus explicitly bestows the local church with the power of the keys. The context of the passage is Jesus' giving instructions on how to treat unrepentant Christians. Following a series of escalations, Christians who remain unrepentant will be presented to the gathered church. Jesus says, "And if he refuses to listen even to the church, let him be to you as a Gentile and a tax collector. Truly, I say to you, whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven" (Matt. 18:17--18). The power of the keys of the kingdom---binding and loosing---is granted to the local church. Given the context of this commission, binding and loosing is the taking in and casting out of members in a local church. By definition, then, a local church must wield the keys of the kingdom by binding and loosing things on earth and heaven, particularly through church membership and excommunication.

Jesus closes this passage by teaching, "For where two or three are gathered in my name, there am I among them" (Matt. 18:20). By describing his presence with the local church, Jesus provides further clarification as to the definition of a local church: a local church requires (at least) two or three to be gathered in his name. Although Christians are still members of a church even when it is not gathered, a local church must be a church that gathers as one body.

Thus, a local church is a group of gospel-believers that periodically gather in the name of Jesus in order to proclaim the gospel and exercise the keys of the kingdom of heaven. This definition satisfies the three goals listed above. First, the definition omits heretical groups by requiring the church to believe and proclaim the true gospel of Christ. Second, this definition leaves out parachurch organizations and other gatherings of Christians because such groups do not attempt to exercise the keys of the kingdom. Third, this definition is ecumenical in that it does not specify how churches must exercise the keys of the kingdom. For example, congregations that disagree about the proper mode and subject of baptism can still call each other churches because they are wielding the keys of the kingdom, however deficiently. The most significant polity structure that is not included in this definition is that of a multi-site church, which attempts to identify multiple gatherings as a single church. Despite this omission, I believe this definition satisfies my explicit goals while explicating the biblical definition of a local church.
