---
title: "Congregational vs. Elder Authority"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Jonathan Leeman's Local Church Doctrine & Practice class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: "What is the relationship between congregational authority and the elders’ authority?"
description: "By wittingly and willfully submitting to its leaders under Christ, the congregation will bring joy to those leaders who must give an account for their flock while ensuring that it will itself be equipped for the work of ministry."
keywords: [congregation, congregationalism, elder, authority, submit, "keys of the kingdom", delegate, lead, govern, governance]
published: false
---

In order to ascertain the authoritative relationship between a congregation and its elders, one must define the church's polity. Thankfully, the New Testament provides many prescriptions regarding authority in, submission to, and governance of local churches. First, the New Testament establishes congregationalism as the normative governance for the church. The New Testament describes and prescribes congregationalism through Jesus' instructions regarding church discipline (Matt. 18:15--20), the selection of the seven proto-deacons (Acts 6:1--6), the commissioning of Barnabas and Saul (Acts 13:1--3), and  Paul's instructions regarding church discipline (1 Cor. 5:1--13), among others.[^C3-1] Second, the New Testament has established elders as the normative leaders in the church. God has given elders to the church in order to "equip the saints for the work of ministry" (Eph. 4:11--12),[^esv]  to "shepherd the flock of God, . . . exercising oversight" (1 Pet. 5:2), and to "care for God's church" (1 Tim. 3:5). Third, the New Testament has established that "Christ is the head of the church, his body, and is himself its Savior" (Eph. 5:23). Therefore, the normative polity of the New Testament is congregational governance submitting to multiple-elder leadership under the headship of Christ.

[^C3-1]: I am indebted to James Garrett for compiling these passages. James Leo Garrett, Jr., "The Congregation-Led Church: Congregational Polity," in _Perspectives on Church Government: Five Views of Church Polity_, edited by Chad Owen Brand and R. Stanton Norman (Nashville: Broadman & Holman, 2004), 158--159.

[^esv]: Unless otherwise specified, all Scripture references are from the English Standard Version (ESV).

Because Christ is the head of the church, everyone in the church is to submit to him as he has revealed himself by his Word. Therefore, Christ's delegated authority does not authorize anyone, neither congregant nor elder, to act in a way contrary to Scripture. Thus, the congregation must use its governing authority to revoke the delegated authority of anyone---especially elders---who tarnishes the name of Christ through unrepentant sin or heresy.

Through the keys of the kingdom that have the power to bind and loose, God has given ultimate earthly authority within the church to the congregation itself. In fact, the New Testament most clearly identifies the congregation's authority in the areas of church membership and discipline, and the commissioning of deacons and missionaries. Because the whole church decides these matters at the least, every member of the church, including every elder, has equal standing within the church to vote their conscience before God. In fact, elders themselves are numbered among the congregation. As God has delegated this authority to the church, the will of a regenerate church ought to reflect the very will of God. Furthermore, God has given individuals in the church various spiritual gifts for the church's benefit, and has established certain positions therein to officially recognize some of the gifted. Therefore, the congregation has the authority to identify individuals gifted for particular offices and delegate authority to them by installing them into those offices.

Under the authority of Christ, the congregation uses its authority to delegate certain authority to the elders. Even though the congregation maintains authority over an elder through the power of the keys (church discipline), a congregation chooses to submit itself to the leadership of that elder by installing him into office so long as the elder submits himself to Christ. It is within this context that the author of Hebrews instructs Christians to "obey your leaders and submit to them, for they are keeping watch over your souls, as those who will have to give an account. Let them do this with joy and not with groaning, for that would be of no advantage to you" (Heb. 13:17). Similarly, Paul encourages Timothy, "Let the elders who rule well be considered worthy of double honor, especially those who labor in preaching and teaching" (1 Tim. 5:17). Congregations are to honor and submit to the leaders to whom they have willfully delegated authority.

The authority of a congregation is in its exercising of the keys of the kingdom, while the authority of the elders is in their leadership of the church. The congregation chooses who should and should not lead, then submits to the leadership of those it has appointed. By wittingly and willfully submitting to its leaders under Christ, the congregation will bring joy to those leaders who must give an account for their flock while ensuring that it will itself be equipped for the work of ministry.
