---
title: "Regulative like Jazz, by Jonathan Leeman"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Jonathan Leeman's Local Church Doctrine & Practice class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: '"Regulative Like Jazz." By Jonathan Leeman. 9Marks Blog. July 10, 2013. <a href="http://9marks.org/article/journalregulative-jazz/">http://9marks.org/article/journalregulative-jazz/</a>.'
description: "Leeman's arguments are both unique and convincing; he reveals a significant advantage in the regulative principle over the normative principle by turning freedom on its head."
keywords: ["Jonathan Leeman", "Regulative like Jazz", 9Marks, worship, normative, regulative, freedom, music]
---

In debates over Christian worship, churches often turn to the regulative principle or the normative principle, whether or not they acknowledge these terms. The regulative principle states that churches ought to worship only in ways that have scriptural warrant, while the normative principle states that churches are free to worship in any way that is not prohibited by Scripture. In "Regulative Like Jazz", a blog post for 9Marks, Jonathan Leeman writes to persuade the reader of the superiority of the regulative principle. The author argues that though the institution of the church has more "freedom" through the normative principle, the individual Christian retains more freedom through the regulative principle. Leeman states, "Churches must not bind the Christian nor the Christian's conscience where Scripture does not bind it." The Christian will not feel coerced to worship in manners that are unnecessarily offensive to him if the institution of the church restricts itself to worshipping only in ways which Scripture has authorized.

The debate concerning the regulative and normative principles centers on whether one interprets the practices of the New Testament churches as prescriptive or descriptive, respectively. Those who use the normative principle often apply it in church worship based on pragmatism---whatever works in a certain context is right. Because this debate is based on the interpretation of Scripture, rather than the authority of Scripture, Leeman attempts to persuade his readers of the superiority of his hermeneutic. He offers the clever perspective that the regulative principle offers the most *freedom* within the church, especially for the individual Christian. In a way, he marries both principles by applying the regulative principle to the church and the normative principle to the individual. That is, churches are to worship together only in the manner that Scripture has authorized for the church, but the Christian is free to worship God through many other means.

By centering his argument on the freedom offered by the regulative principle, Leeman appeals to freedom-minded churches that would otherwise favor the normative principle. The freedom Leeman speaks of is primarily that of the individual Christian's conscience. Because Christians are called by God to submit to a local church, they must submit themselves to the worship practices of that church. If that church embraces the regulative principle, the individuals are then free from an unnecessarily pierced conscience borne of binding practices they consider unnecessary, unhelpful, or offensive. Indeed, a pierced conscience in a regulative church ought to come only from the Scripture itself.

Leeman's final freedom-oriented argument for the regulative principle is that it offers a framework in which the church can both practice and grow in creativity. Likening such regulative services to jazz music, the author concludes, "Ah, what diverse things we can preach, pray, and sing about this gospel of harmonious glory! How many variations can you spin out on that melody?" Regulative churches may limit their corporate worship options to the warrants of Scripture, but that still allows for variety within those strictures.

To a reader that already holds to the regulative principle of worship, Leeman's arguments are both unique and convincing. The author reveals a significant advantage in the regulative principle over the normative principle by turning freedom on its head. This angle will appeal to freedom-minded individuals who find themselves torn between these theories of worship in the church.
