---
title: "Theological Critique of Multi-Site, by Jonathan Leeman"
layout: post
category: posts
tag: seminary
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Jonathan Leeman's Local Church Doctrine & Practice class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
intro: '"Theological Critique of Multi-Site: What Exactly Is a Church?" By Jonathan Leeman. <cite>9Marks Journal</cite>. May-June 2009. <a href="http://9marks.org/article/theological-critique-multi-site-what-exactly-church/">http://9marks.org/article/theological-critique-multi-site-what-exactly-church/</a>.'
description: "Leeman's article succeeds in its purpose of critiquing the multi-site model. While the article may convince those who were previously uncommitted to a position, it may not persuade those who already hold to the multi-site model."
keywords: ["Jonathan Leeman", "Theological Critique of Multi-Site", multi-site, ecclesiology, polity]
published: false
---

In "Theological Critique of Multi-Site: What Exactly Is a 'Church'?" an article for the bimonthly _9Marks Journal_, Jonathan Leeman addresses his concerns with the  multi-site and multi-service models of the local church. This multi movement has been growing for decades as technology and pastoral celebrity have given churches both the means and motivation to consolidate multiple gatherings into one corporation, under one set of leaders, and with one preaching pastor. Leeman contends that a multi-site church is not one church; rather, it is several incorporated churches. The author's position against the multi-site and multi-service models is rooted in his definition of a church, requiring it be one gathered body.

Leeman is generally even-handed in his critique of this movement, often allowing his opponents to speak for themselves. His opponents commonly define a multi-site church as "one church meeting in multiple locations," sharing "a common vision, budget, leadership, and board." However, Leeman overstates his case when he writes that multi-site advocates "seem to take the idea of gathering or assembling out of the definition of a church." In actuality, Leeman's opponents change the necessary gathering from one to many, ignoring the extreme cases of "Internet Campuses". While the multi-site model and definition of a church emphasizes a corporate unity over a single gathering, it still assumes multiple gatherings within the corporation. Therefore, though Leeman and his opponents disagree on the type of gathering required, there seems to be no disagreement on the necessity of some type of gathering(s).

Leeman notes that across centuries and denominations, the historical definition of a local church has consistently been limited to one congregation. However, given that Leeman's opponents partly identify a multi-site church by its shared leadership, Leeman could have strengthened his historical argument by citing the example of circuit riders. These frontier preachers would pastor multiple churches by traveling to them throughout the month. Similar to multi-site churches of today, a frontier pastor would have provided a "unified leadership" across multiple congregations. However, contrary to the multi movement, each congregation identified itself as a distinct church based on its gathering, despite any shared vision or leadership.

The author does strengthen his critique of multi-site and multi-service churches by invoking the administration of the keys of the kingdom. When the authors of the New Testament discuss the keys of the kingdom, it is always within the context of one gathering of believers---a local church. Because the apostolic keys of the kingdom were given to the local church, Leeman argues that multi-site churches fail to administer the keys correctly. In a multi-site church that never gathers together, either the leadership usurps the keys or individual campuses exercise the keys independently from the whole "church." For the rare multi-site church that attempts to gather together periodically, the keys are exercised in such a manner that the unified group has no ability to vote with direct knowledge and integrity in matters of membership and discipline. The perceived significance of the multi-site debate hinges upon one's interpretation of the keys of the kingdom.

Leeman's article succeeds in its purpose of critiquing the multi-site model. While the article may convince those who were previously uncommitted to a position, it may not persuade those who already hold to the multi-site model. Nevertheless, Leeman's contribution is worth the read for both sides.
