---
title: "Adoniram Judson: A Story of Sanctified Ambition"
layout: post
category: papers
tags: [seminary]
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Nathan Finn's Baptist History class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
description: "Adoniram Judson’s life serves modern Baptists as an example of God’s sanctifying a person’s selfish ambition into a selfless ambition used
for the mission of God."
image:
    feature: papers/adoniram-judson.jpg
keywords: ["Adoniram Judson", "Ann Hasselitine", "Sarah Broadman", "Emily Chubbock", mission, missionary, suffer, ambition, sanctified, selfless, selfish ]
---

Adoniram Judson was a Congregationalist-turned-Baptist who served as a
missionary to Burma (now Myanmar) and was part of the first group of
Americans commissioned for foreign mission service. A gifted academic
all of his life, Judson translated the Bible, along with other gospel
literature, into the Burmese language. All the while, his family
suffered for the sake of the gospel—the first two of his three wives
died on the field, and seven of his thirteen children never reached
adulthood. Despite the great trials and persecution, including nineteen
months that Judson spent in "Death Prisons," the Judson mission to Burma
resulted in thousands of baptisms and dozens of new congregations during
the life of its patriarch. Tom Elliff reflects, "Few people would dare
question Adoniram Judson’s impact on the history of modern
missions."[^1]

[^1]: Tom Elliff, foreword to *Adoniram Judson: A Bicentennial Appreciation of the Pioneer American Missionary*, ed. Jason G. Duesing (Nashville: B&H, 2012), xix.


Judson—who died at sea on April 12, 1850—was born August 9, 1788 in
Malden, Massachusetts, to a Congregationalist minister. Adoniram began
reading at an early age and excelled at all types of study, especially
linguistics. Unfortunately, he thought much of himself because of his
intellect and reeked of selfish-ambition into his young adult years.
However, Judson providentially converted from his intellectual Deism to
true Christianity and received God’s call to be a missionary to the
nations. On February 5, 1812, Adoniram Judson married Ann Hasseltine;
the very next day, Judson was ordained for missionary service, along
with his compatriots. Only two weeks after their wedding day, Adoniram
and Ann Judson departed for India and on to Burma.[^2]

[^2]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Jason G. Duesing, "Ambition Overthrown: The Conversion, Consecration, and Commission of Adoniram Judson, 1788–1812," in Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 55–76.


Ambition characterized Judson throughout his life, though in different
forms. Jason Duesing writes, "During his formative years, he sought fame
and the praise of men. By the end of his life, this ambition had been
overthrown and redirected."[^3] Through Judson’s conversion, his
ambition was sanctified; that sanctified ambition became an instrument
in spreading the gospel. Thus, Adoniram Judson’s life serves modern
Baptists as an example of God’s sanctifying a person’s selfish ambition
into a selfless ambition used for the mission of God.

[^3]: Ibid., 55.


Selfish Ambition
================

Adoniram Judson grew up seeking praise for himself rather than God,
despite his upbringing in the home of a Christian pastor. He began
reading at age three and excelled in advanced math, science, and even
nautical navigation. Conscious of his many talents, "his ambition drove
him to make a significant impression on many outside his own
family."[^4] Confident in his own brilliance, Judson set out for
Providence College (now Brown University), being admitted at just
sixteen years old. Idolizing praise from his peers, Judson became
enamored with Deism, which seemed to him an intellectually superior
worldview. Ironically, "at a school that promoted the study of the Word
of God, Judson’s ambition continued to oppose the Spirit and the
Word."[^5] To Judson’s delight, his achievements matched his ambitions
during college—he accomplished every task to which he set himself, and
even received praise from the president of the college for his
performance at the school. Judson graduated from Providence College as
valedictorian of his class at age nineteen.[^6]

[^4]: Ibid., 56.

[^5]: Ibid., 57.

[^6]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 55–59.


After graduation, Judson returned home to start an academy; however, his
Deistic beliefs were not as popular in Plymouth as they had been at
Providence College. Thus, after a year, Judson closed his fledgling
school and traveled the country in wanderlust. Despite his ill-gone
ways, his family still supported young Judson—his father provided him
with a horse, and his uncle allowed Judson to stay with him in
Connecticut. Judson eventually found his way to New York, seeking
employment as a playwright. While pursuing fame in New York, he and his
fellow actors "lived a reckless, vagabond life … running up a score, and
then decamping without paying the reckoning."[^7] After New York, Judson
continued his quest to actualize his ambitions, deciding to travel west
for his next adventure. After his first day of travel, he made a
providential stop at an inn, which would be the beginning of the end of
Adoniram Judson’s selfish ambitions.[^8]

[^7]: Adoniram Judson, conversation between Gougher and Judson, quoted in Henry Gougher, *A Personal Narrative of Two Years’ Imprisonment in Burmah* (London: John Murray, 1860), 179. Judson also noted, "Before leaving America … I made a second tour over the same ground, carefully making amends to all whom I injured."

[^8]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Duesing, "Ambition Overthrown," 59–60.


Sanctified Ambition
===================

To his great discomfort, Judson’s room at the inn was next to an ailing
and dying man. Throughout the night, the moans and groans of his
neighbor tormented Judson; he could not bear the thought of this man’s
death, nor of his own. Judson’s Deism was failing him in light of the
reality of death. Even as he worried and questioned the state of his
soul, he "chided himself for even entertaining such thoughts contrary to
his philosophy of life beyond the grave and thought how his brilliant
college friend [Jacob Eames] would rebuke him if he learned of these
childish worries."[^9] Eames, who had similar talents and ambitions as
Judson, was the one "who set out to win Judson to his deistic faith" in
the first place.[^10] Despite the potential antagonism from his dear
friend, Judson could not shake the thoughts about his and his neighbor’s
eternal states.[^11]

[^9]: Daniel L. Akin, "Marked for Death, Messengers of Life: Adoniram and Ann Judson," in Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 169.

[^10]: Ibid., 168.

[^11]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 168–169.


When Judson exited his room in the morning, he inquired of the innkeeper
about the state of the dying man, only to find out that the man had
passed away during the night. Out of curiosity, Judson asked for the
identity of the recently deceased. The innkeeper replied, "It was a
young man from Providence College—a very fine fellow. His name was
Eames."[^12] Adoniram reeled from the realization that his own college
friend had just died as a man lost from God. "One single thought
occupied his mind, and the words ‘Dead! Lost! Lost!’ were continually
ringing in his ears. He knew the religion of the Bible to be true. He
felt its truth and he was in despair."[^13] Through the death of Jacob
Eames, the very friend who had sent him down the godless path of Deism,
Judson began to return to the path of God.[^14]

[^12]: Francis Wayland, *A Memoir of the Life and Labors of the Rev. Adoniram Judson, D. D.* (Boston: Phillips, Sampson, and Co., 1853), 1:25. In the original, Eames is anonymized as E——.

[^13]: Ibid.

[^14]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Akin, 168–169.


Following this life-altering episode at the inn, Judson immediately
returned home in order to fully examine the Christian religion. "For the
first time, Judson suspended his ambition in the face of a growing
conviction from the Spirit and the Word of God."[^15] He studied the
Scriptures, determined their divine origin, and recognized his own lost
state. Yet, the intellectual Judson continued to struggle with trusting
God and the Bible. Not yet a Christian, Judson entered Andover
Theological Seminary on October 12, 1808 by special permission.
According to his professors, his self-reliance, pride, and ambition were
clearly manifest. However, after a few weeks at the seminary, Judson and
others began to see signs of conversion in the young man’s life. This
was "the beginning of the destruction of his self-fashioned idols of
ambition and autonomy."[^16] By his second year of seminary, Judson was
beginning to consider devoting his own life to the mission field. The
selfish ambition that had driven Judson for twenty years had finally
been sanctified; God was preparing him to use his transformed ambitions
to proclaim the gospel to the nations.[^17]

[^15]: Duesing, "Ambition Overthrown," 60.

[^16]: Ibid., 64.

[^17]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 60–65.


Selfless Ambition
=================

While a student at Andover, Judson joined a group of former Williams
College students called "the Brethren," which was formed out of the
well-known "Haystack Revival." Along with some from this group, Judson
felt called to the mission field, so much so that he turned down
influential positions at both Providence College and a church in his
hometown of Plymouth. The modern missionary figures William Carey and
David Brainerd were already well-known on the seminary campus, so
Judson’s call was not as surprising as it would have been in his
parents’ generation. Still, such a commission would make Judson and his
companions the first American missionaries sent overseas.[^18]

[^18]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 68–75.


Before receiving this commission, Adoniram became enamored with Ann
Hasseltine. Knowing his own calling to the mission field—and having
already counted the cost of a missionary life—Adoniram wrote the
following letter to Mr. Hasseltine, asking for Ann’s hand in marriage.
Judson’s striking words to his future father-in-law were seemingly
prescient:

> I have now to ask whether you can consent to part with your daughter
> early next spring, to see her no more in this world; whether you can
> consent to her departure to a heathen land, and her subjection to the
> hardships and sufferings of a missionary life; whether you can consent
> to her exposure to the dangers of the ocean, to the fatal influence of
> the southern climate of India, to every kind of want and distress, to
> degradation, insult, persecution, and perhaps a violent death? Can you
> consent to all this for the sake of him who left his heavenly home and
> died for her and for you; for the sake of the perishing immortal
> souls; for the sake of Zion and the glory of God? Can you consent to
> all this, in hope of soon meeting your daughter in the world of glory,
> with a crown of righteousness brightened by the acclamations of praise
> which shall redound to her Savior from heathens saved, through her
> means, from eternal woe and despair?[^19]

[^19]: Adoniram Judson, letter to Mr. Hasseltine, quoted in Edward Judson, *Adoniram Judson, D. D.: His Life and Labours* (London: Hotter and Stoughton, 1883), 20.

Judson was as frank with Ann as he was with her father, writing to her,
"We shall probably experience seasons when we shall be ‘exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.’ We shall see many dreary, disconsolate
hours, and feel a sinking of spirits, anguish of mind, of which now we
can form little conceptions. O, we shall wish to lie down and die. And
that time may come soon."[^20] Both Mr. Hasseltine and Ann obliged
Judson’s request, making the woman the first American missionary wife.
Two weeks following their wedding, the Judsons set sail for the East on
February 19, 1812, choosing to die to self for the sake of bringing the
gospel to the Burmese people.[^21]

[^20]: Adoniram Judson, letter to Ann Hasseltine, January 1, 1811, quoted in Wayland, 1:34–35.

[^21]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Akin, 170–171.


The Judsons counted the cost of their missionary enterprise accurately;
their ambitions for the mission of God in Burma were matched equally by
their suffering on the field. Constantly battling illnesses themselves,
the couple was surrounded by the suffering and death of others. Adoniram
and Ann’s first child was stillborn as they relocated to Burma from
India—they feared Ann would die as well. Yet, just a few days later, the
Judsons arrived in Rangoon, Burma and began their mission. Their second
child, Roger Williams Judson, survived eight months before his own
passing. In addition, the Burmese government placed Judson in a "Death
Prison" for nearly two years on suspicion of his being a spy. For many
of those months, Judson and the others prisoners were inverted at night
so that only their heads and shoulders touched the ground. During this
time, Maria—Adoniram and Ann’s third child—was born. While chronically
ill and caring for a baby at home, Ann valiantly ministered to her
husband during his imprisonment. Though Adoniram was eventually
released, Ann did not survive long after his imprisonment. On October
24, 1826, Judson’s wife of fourteen years died of a fever while he was
traveling. Little Maria died six months later, at age two. Finally,
three months after Maria’s passing, Judson heard of his own father’s
death.[^22]

[^22]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Nathan A. Finn, "Until All Burma Worships the Eternal God: Adoniram Judson, the Missionary, 1812–50," in Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 86–91.


After fifteen years in the East, Adoniram was left without wife or
children. He subsequently suffered from severe depression for some
years, even retreating into a tiger-infested jungle to live as a hermit
for a time. In the jungle, Judson dug his own grave and sat next to it,
contemplating death, for days on end. However, Judson survived the
jungle and eventually emerged from his depression. By 1830, the Lord had
refreshed Judson for his mission in Burma.[^23]

[^23]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 91–93.


After being a widower for eight years, Judson married Sarah Boardman in
1834; Sarah was a fellow missionary to Burma who had lost her own spouse
on the field. Together, Judson and Sarah had eight children. However,
after two of the children died, Sarah’s own health began to decline.
Thus, in 1845—thirty-three years after leaving America—Judson took his
first furlough in order for Sarah to recover. The Judsons left their
three youngest in Burma while the three oldest traveled with them to
America. While at sea, Sarah’s health vacillated, and the Judsons’
eleven-year marriage ended when Sarah died at sea near the Cape of Good
Hope in South Africa. Grieving, Judson and his three children continued
on to America.[^24]

[^24]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 93–95.


After arriving in America, Judson discovered that he was a celebrity;
his missioanary endeavors in Burma were well publicized back home.
However, he still desired to return to the mission field and his three
youngest children. While on furlough, Judson found a new Mrs. Judson in
Emily Chubbuck, who was an unmarried novelist writing pseudonymously as
Fanny Forrester. Three weeks after the wedding, the new Judson couple
returned to Burma, leaving Judson’s oldest three children in America in
order for them to receive an education. Upon their arrival overseas, the
new couple was received by only two of their youngest children—one had
died while Judson was away. Emily cared for the Judson children and bore
one child of her own. However, one year later, Emily fell gravely ill,
and Judson feared the worst. Although Emily recovered from this bout,
her husband contracted a lingering illness around the same time she
became pregnant with her second child. Seeing no relief from his illness
while in Burma, Judson attempted to travel to the Isle of France
(Mauritius) for recovery. However, nine days after departing, Judson
died. He was buried at sea on April 12, 1850, ending his four-year
marriage to Emily. Ten days after her husband’s death, Emily delivered
Charles Judson, who died at birth. Emily did not hear of her husband’s
passing until four months later. She then returned to America and died
from a bout of tuberculosis only four years after Judson’s death.[^25]

[^25]: Unless otherwise specified, the information in this paragraph comes primarily from Ibid., 95–99.


Successful Ambition
===================

The Judsons experienced unfathomable suffering as they laid down their
lives for the gospel in Burma. Although their faithfulness alone shows
that they were successful in their calling, the Lord chose to work
through them to bring salvation to many of the Burmese people. Despite
the many setbacks, illnesses, and numerous deaths in the family, Judson
learned the Burmese language, translated the Scripture, and made
disciples among the natives. He preached his first Burmese sermon after
laboring with the language for seven years. Months later, he baptized
his first Burmese convert, Moung Hau. By his tenth year of ministry in
1822, Judson could count eighteen converts.[^26] In 1823, one year
before his imprisonment, Judson published his translation of the New
Testament in Burmese. After twenty-two years away from America, Judson
completed his Burmese translation of the entire Bible in 1834, the same
year he married Sarah Boardman. Judson’s comprehensive *Burman and
English Dictionary* was published posthumously in 1852. Notably,
Judson’s translation of the Burmese Bible is considered a translation
*par excellence* and remains the Burmese translation of choice today.
Furthermore, Judson’s rules for translation became the standard practice
for other Baptist missionaries of his time.[^27]

[^26]: Akin, 172.

[^27]: Finn, 85–86.


Adoniram Judson’s life serves modern Baptists as an example of God’s
sanctifying a person’s selfish ambition into a selfless ambition used
for the mission of God. The nearly forty-year Judson mission left a
lasting legacy on the people of Burma (now Myanmar)—according to Danny
Akin, "Adoniram would live to see about 7,000 people baptized in Burma
by the time of his death, and 63 congregations were established under
163 missionaries, native pastors, and assistants. Today the Myanmar
Baptist Convention has more than 600,000 members in 3,513
churches."[^28] However, the need for the gospel is still great in
Myanmar and other nations around the globe. Christ has called his church
to make disciples of every nation, even to the end of the earth. As
Adoniram Judson told his fellow Americans as he returned to the mission
field of Burma:

[^28]: Akin, 176.


> Let us not, then, regret the loss of those who have gone before us,
> and are waiting to welcome us home, nor shrink from the summons that
> must call us thither. Let us only resolve to follow them who through
> faith and patience inherit the promises. Let us so employ the remnant
> of life, and so pass away, as that our successors will say of us, as
> we of our predecessors, "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord.
> They rest from their labors, and their works do follow them."[^29]

[^29]: Adoniram Judson, "Parting Address of Mr. Judson," *Southern Baptist Missionary Journal* 1, no. 2 (July 1846): 33.


May the church see the example of the Judson mission and answer Christ’s
call to die to self and suffer for the sake of the gospel. May those who
have selfish ambitions be sanctified into selfless instruments for the
mission of God.

---


Bibliography
============

Akin, Daniel L. "Marked for Death, Messengers of Life: Adoniram and Ann
Judson." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 167–178.

Duesing, Jason G., ed. *Adoniram Judson: A Bicentennial Appreciation of
the Pioneer American Missionary*. Studies in Baptist Life and Thought.
Nashville: B&H, 2012. Kindle.

———. "Ambition Overthrown: The Conversion, Consecration, and Commission
of Adoniram Judson, 1788–1812." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 55–76.

———. "Conclusion: Please Come and Dig." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*,
179–181.

Elliff, Tom. Foreword to Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, xix–xx.

Finch, Candi. "So That the World May Know: The Legacy of Adoniram
Judson’s Wives." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 101–127.

Finn, Nathan A. "Until All Burma Worships the Eternal God: Adoniram
Judson, the Missionary, 1812–50." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 77–100.

Gougher, Henry. *A Personal Narrative of Two Years’ Imprisonment in
Burmah, 1824*–*26*. London: John Murray, 1860.

Judson, Adoniram. "Parting Address of Mr. Judson." *Southern Baptist
Missionary Journal* 1, no. 2 (July 1846): 31–33.

Judson, Edward. *Adoniram Judson, D. D.: His Life and Labours*. London:
Hotter and Stoughton, 1883.

Patterson, Paige. "Introduction: From Judson’s Prison to the Ends of the
Earth." In Duesing, *Adoniram Judson*, 1–7.

Wayland, Francis. *A Memoir of the Life and Labors of the Rev. Adoniram
Judson, D. D.* 2 Vols. Boston: Phillips, Sampson, and Co., 1853.
