---
title: "An Exegesis of 1 Corinthians 7:10–16"
layout: post
category: papers
tags: [seminary]
context: "The following partially satisfies the requirements for Dr. Edward Gravely's New Testament Introduction class at Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary."
description: "In 1 Corinthians 7:10–16, Paul charges Christians
not to initiate a divorce, and to remain single (or reconcile) if they
do; however, it is possible that Paul acknowledges the liberty to
remarry for the Christian who receives a divorce from his or her
unbelieving spouse."
keywords: ["1 Corinthians 7:10–16", marriage, divorce, remarriage, Christian, unbelieving, husband, wife, spouse]
---

Introduction
============

A thoughtful theology of marriage, divorce, and remarriage has become
increasingly important for Christians in light of Western culture’s
changing views of sexuality and marriage over the past decades. However,
scholarly analysis of the relevant scriptural passages has demonstrated
the difficulty of systematizing a biblical theology of divorce and
remarriage. Evangelical conclusions regarding divorce and remarriage
range from permitting no divorce and no remarriage to allowing divorce
and remarriage under a variety of circumstances.[^1] Because of the
apparent difficulty of developing a biblical theology of divorce and
remarriage, Christians should build a systematic theology of marriage by
considering each relevant text and then harmonizing the result. Thus,
this paper will consider only one building block that contributes to a
practical theology of divorce and remarriage. This paper will argue that
in 1 Corinthians 7:10–16, Paul charges Christians not to initiate a
divorce, and to remain single (or reconcile) if they do; however, it is
possible that Paul acknowledges the liberty to remarry for the Christian
who receives a divorce from his or her unbelieving spouse.

Exegesis
========

Almost all of 1 Corinthians 7 relates directly to the doctrine and
practice of marriage. In this chapter, Paul is responding to a statement
from the Corinthian church, namely, “It is good for a man not to have
sexual relations with a woman” (v. 1).[^2] According to Gordon Fee, Paul
is addressing a specific situation in Corinth, namely, “their apparent
rejection of marriage on ascetic grounds.”[^3] Paul responds that
spouses should give and receive the conjugal rights of marriage in order
to avoid the temptation of Satan (v. 5). Paul also uses this chapter to
address people who have been assigned different lots in life, especially
in relation to marriage. In verses 8–9, Paul encourages the unmarried
and widows to remain single, though he permits them to marry. In verses
10–11, Paul instructs the married not to divorce their spouses. In
verses 12–16, Paul instructs “the rest” to remain with their unbelieving
spouses, if possible. While Paul wishes everyone could be single for the
sake of undistracted devotion to God, he instructs each person to “lead
the life that the Lord has assigned to him” (v. 17). Following, Paul
gives more examples of remaining in whatever condition each was called
(vv. 18–24). Thus, the interpretation of verses 10–16 ought to consider
Paul’s overarching theme for verses 1–24, which is, according to Gordon
Wenham and William Heth, that Christians should “remain in the same
situation in life in which they were when they became Christian.”[^4]

1 Corinthians 7:10–11
---------------------

Paul writes, “To the married I give this charge (not I, but the Lord):
the wife should not separate from her husband (but if she does, she
should remain unmarried or else be reconciled to her husband), and the
husband should not divorce his wife” (1 Cor. 7:10–11). In giving this
command, Paul refers to Jesus’ own instructions regarding divorce and
remarriage (see Matthew 5:32; 19:3–12). While Paul rarely appeals
directly to the teaching of Jesus, this qualification notes that Paul’s
command in verses 10–11 is equivalent to what Jesus himself taught
(unlike verses 12–16, which did not originate from Jesus’ own
words).[^5] Because Paul does to not attempt to quote Jesus verbatim,
there appears to be an assumed familiarity among the Corinthians with
the content of the Lord’s original teaching.[^6]

Citing the command of Jesus, Paul charges the wife not to separate from
her husband and commands the husband not to divorce his wife. The verb
“to separate” (χωρίζω) is defined as “to separate by departing from
someone”[^7] while the verb “to divorce” (ἀφίημι) means, “to dismiss or
release someone or something from a place or one’s presence; in a legal
sense, divorce.”[^8] These two verbs are repeated throughout 1
Corinthians 7:10–16. Notably, these two verbs are synonyms and are
likely the result of stylistic variation.[^9] In Greco-Roman society,
the very act of separation was considered to be a divorce, though one
without legal documentation.[^10] This type of “divorce by separation”
was common for the era.[^11] Thus, interpreters should not place too
much emphasis on the semantic difference between these two verbs.[^12]
In fact, if the woman were merely separating physically, i.e., not
divorcing her spouse, then Paul would not have needed to instruct the
separated wife to remain single—she would have been legally unable to
remarry. However, because “to separate” and “to divorce” are synonymous
for Paul, he is directly charging the woman not to divorce her husband.
Thus, the apostle does not prohibit the modern idea of the temporary,
physical separation as part of an ongoing attempt for marital
reconciliation; he prohibits the wife from legally divorcing her
husband.

Paul continues in verse 11, instructing that if a Christian wife does
divorce her husband, she ought to remain unmarried or else be reconciled
to her spouse. Roy Ciampa and Brian Rosner contend that Paul gives the
wife two options because, as in Mark 10:11–12, “divorcing one’s partner
is judged to be a legalized form of adultery.”[^13] However, David
Garland argues that, rather than presenting the wife with two options,
Paul “directs her to remain unmarried in order to be reconciled with her
husband.”[^14] Regardless of the potential nuance of the options, the
better option must be reconciliation. However, when the option for
marital reconciliation becomes impossible, e.g., via the husband’s own
remarriage, Paul’s injunction appears to stand: the divorcing wife is to
remain unmarried.

In verses 10–11, Paul addresses first the wife and then the husband;
Ciampa and Rosner argue this ordering suggests that wives were
instigating the divorces in the Corinthian church, perhaps as an
application of the celibate asceticism addressed in verse 1.[^15]
Regardless, Paul addresses the husband with the same command as the
wife: do not divorce your spouse. Fee avers that Paul’s lack of an
explicit exception for the husband further suggests that the problem lay
with the women of Corinth; however, Fee concludes, “What is said of the
wife would apply to the husband as well.”[^16] Thus, Paul charges the
married Christian not to divorce her (or his) spouse; if the Christian
disobeys even this admonition, Paul exhorts her to remain unmarried or
else remarry her wronged spouse.

In their analysis of these verses, Wenham and Heth—who conclude
Scripture permits no remarriage after any divorce—interpret that Paul
“permitted only two courses of action after *any* divorce: remain
single/unmarried or be reconciled.”[^17] However, their view fails to
recognize that Paul is speaking here only to Christians who initiate a
divorce; he offers no command in verses 10–11 to Christians receiving a
divorce. Others, such as John Murray and William Luck prefer to read
Paul’s exception-less command as one with implied exceptions *a la*
Matthew 19:9.[^18] However, this view demotes the perspicuity of Mark
10:11–12, which states that a Christian should not divorce his or her
spouse (without exception). Indeed, Paul’s statement in 1 Corinthians
7:10–11 accords more directly with Jesus’ address in Mark 10:11–12 than
Matthew’s rendition in 19:9. Thus, Paul charges Christians, without any
stated exception, to stay married and not to divorce their spouses. If
they fail to do that, Paul exhorts them to remain unmarried or else be
reconciled.

1 Corinthians 7:12–14
---------------------

Paul continues his charge:

> To the rest I say (I, not the Lord) that if any brother has a wife who
> is an unbeliever, and she consents to live with him, he should not
> divorce her. If any woman has a husband who is an unbeliever, and he
> consents to live with her, she should not divorce him. For the
> unbelieving husband is made holy because of his wife, and the
> unbelieving wife is made holy because of her husband. Otherwise your
> children would be unclean, but as it is, they are holy. (1 Cor.
> 7:12–14)

As Paul (and Jesus) instructed Christians not to divorce their believing
spouses (vv. 10–11; cf. Mark 10:11–12), Paul (alone) now instructs
Christians not to divorce their unbelieving spouses (vv. 12–13). That
is, for Christians in mixed marriages, Paul inserts a qualification to
his no-divorce rule: the unbeliever must consent to remaining in the
marriage with the Christian. Paul further explicates this qualification
in verses 15–16.[^19] Notably, Paul gives husbands and wives identical
commands, which emphasizes “the evenhanded mutuality of Paul’s
exhortation.”[^20]

In verses 12–13, both instances of the verb “to divorce” are the same
form of ἀφίημι. While Paul used ἀφίημι as an infinitive in verse 11, he
uses it as an imperative in verses 12–13. Thus, Ciampa and Rosner write,
“Paul uses a resolute third-person imperative properly translated as an
uncompromising command.”[^21] According to Garland, “should not divorce”
is a softened form of the verb’s proper force, which ought to be “must
not divorce.”[^22] Thus, even though Paul distinguishes between his and
Jesus’ explicit teachings, he still expects the Corinthians to view his
own instructions as authoritative.[^23]

In verses 12–13, Paul commands the Christian to remain married to his or
her unbelieving spouse if the unbeliever “consents to live with” the
Christian. This is not merely consenting to being roommates or sharing a
home; Paul’s qualification is for the unbelieving spouse to desire to
remain within a committed marriage.[^24] However, it is possible that
Paul expects the believing spouse to endure much impropriety from the
unbelieving spouse, including sexual immorality. After all, the
Christian in view is married to an unbelieving, Corinthian spouse whom
one could hardly expect to be an exemplar of marital fidelity.[^25]

In verse 14, Paul explains that Christians ought to remain in their
mixed marriages because it makes holy the unbelieving spouse and their
children; otherwise, the children would be unclean. Paul’s use of “holy”
cannot connote a salvific sense, especially in light of verse 16, in
which Paul claims Christians are ignorant as to whether they will save
their spouses.[^26] Fee contends that Paul offers this rationale in
response to the Corinthian church’s misunderstanding of his previous
instruction not to associate with the sexually immoral (cf. 1 Cor.
5:9–11). Rather than the unbeliever defiling the believer, the Christian
spouse sanctifies the non-Christian spouse.[^27] Fee writes that
unbelieving spouses in mixed marriages are “set apart in a special way
that will hopefully lead to their salvation.”[^28] Thus, in the
relationship between a Christian to his or her spouse and children,
“‘clean’ trumps ‘unclean.’”[^29] However, Mark Dever believes that this
passage “simply means that [the children] are not illegitimate.”[^30]
Regardless, Garland rightly summarizes the thrust of Paul’s argument in
verses 12–14, writing, “Mixed marriages have the same status as
Christian marriages and should not be abandoned.”[^31]

Thus, while Paul adds the qualification that the other (unbelieving)
spouse must consent to remain married, he gives an equivalent command to
Christians in all types of marriages: do not divorce your spouse. If a
Christian makes the mistake of divorcing his or her spouse, Paul exhorts
such a one to remain unmarried or to reconcile (v. 11). Although this
latter charge is explicitly written to wives, it is implied for
husbands, and can be assumed to apply to all types of marriages, mixed
or not. That is, Christians should not divorce their spouses, and if
they do, they should remain unmarried or reconcile. Paul does not offer
any other options for the Christian who initiates a divorce with his or
her spouse. However, how one interprets Jesus’ divorce teaching
significantly affects how one interprets Paul’s commands. Carl Laney
interprets Paul in light of Mark 10:11–12, concluding, “Paul gives no
other options, for according to his understanding, neither did
Jesus.”[^32] On the other hand, Thomas Edgar reads the same command of
Paul and assumes implicit exceptions in light of Matthew 19:9,
concluding, “It is wrong to divorce one’s spouse and marry another
unless it is because of adultery.”[^33] However, despite any assumed
exceptions, the overwhelming force of Paul’s commands in 1 Corinthians
7:10–14 is for Christians to remain in their marriages. Therefore, Fee
rightly concludes, “Believers are not to initiate divorce.”[^34] Any
divorce of a Christian marriage ought to come only through the
initiative of an unbeliever.

1 Corinthians 7:15–16
---------------------

In 1 Corinthians 7:15–16, Paul explains his previous qualification for
the unbeliever’s consent in an ongoing mixed marriage. The apostle
writes, “But if the unbelieving partner separates, let it be so. In such
cases, the brother or sister is not enslaved. God has called you to
peace. For how do you know, wife, whether you will save your husband? Or
how do you know, husband, whether you will save your wife?” The most
significant words in this section are “to separate”, “peace”, “to save,”
and “to enslave.” As noted above, the verb “to separate” (χωρίζω) is the
same used in verse 10 and is synonymous with “to divorce.” “Peace”
(εἰρήνη) means “a state of concord, peace, harmony, good order.”[^35]
Thus, God has called Christians to a state of harmony and good order,
although some debate whether Paul means peace within the marriage or
peace through the divorce. The verb “to save” (σῴζω) means “to save or
preserve from transcendent danger or destruction.”[^36] However, the
saving Paul has in mind is akin to soul winning, not some type of
eternal salvation through familial association.[^37]

Notably, the verb “to enslave” (δουλόω) means “to make one subservient
to one’s interests, cause to be like a slave”[^38] The verb “to enslave”
(δουλόω) is particularly significant because some scholars consider it
to be similar to the verb “to bind” (δέω), which Paul uses to describe
the marital union later in verses 27 and 39.[^39] However, unlike “to
enslave” (δουλόω), “to bind” (δέω) means “to constrain by law and
duty.”[^40] Thus, Anthony Thiselton writes concerning verse 15, “The
syntactical meaning is clear: the Christian husband or wife does not
remain in slavery.”[^41] While scholars generally agree that Paul gives
explicit permission for the Christian to receive a divorce from the
unbeliever (“let it be so,” v. 15), there is no consensus regarding what
a Christian may do after such a divorce.[^42] Paul writes that when an
unbeliever decides to divorce, the believer is “not enslaved” (v. 15).
The question remains: to what is the Christian no longer enslaved? The
two primary options are that the Christian is free from the duties of
the marital relationship (but may not remarry), or the Christian is free
from the marriage covenant itself (and is thus free to remarry).[^43]
Mark Strauss lists this interpretive dilemma as one of the three most
significant issues in the remarriage debate.[^44]

Espousing the no-remarriage position, William Heth writes:

> Paul is not saying that the believer is no longer bound in marriage to
> his unbelieving spouse. … Paul is saying that the believer is no
> longer bound by Christ's command not to divorce when his unbelieving
> spouse wants to leave. The Christian may allow his partner the legal
> formality of a divorce even though he himself does not recognize its
> validity in the eyes of God.”[^45]

Some scholars counter the view of a legal divorce (or separation)
without the liberty to remarry by citing David Instone-Brewer’s
influential work on the social and literary context of divorce and
remarriage in the biblical era.[^46] Instone-Brewer demonstrates that
Jewish and Greco-Roman certificates typically contained the phrase, “you
are free to marry any man you wish,” or something similar.[^47] Thus, he
concludes, “To first-century readers, whether they were Jewish or
Greco-Roman, Paul’s words would immediately remind them of the freedom
to remarry. This is also the meaning that fits best in the context of
the passage.”[^48] However, Paul does not specify to what a Christian is
no longer enslaved; thus, while Instone-Brewer’s social and literary
research is both convincing and highly influential, one must systematize
a biblical theology of divorce and remarriage before one can know
precisely Paul’s intended repercussions from the phrase “not enslaved.”

Continuing in verse 15, Paul writes, “God has called you to peace.” Fee
notes that this sentence begins with a (often un-translated) “but” (δέ)
with an adversative force. Thus, Fee contends that Paul uses the call to
peace as a preferred alternative to the unbelieving spouse’s
departure.[^49] That is, Paul desires for there to be peace within the
mixed marriage, a harmony among the Christian and unbelieving
spouse.[^50] This would leave a positive force on all of verse 16, in
which Paul offers a hypothetical reason for remaining in a mixed
marriage: perhaps the Christian’s presence will be instrumental in the
salvation of the unbelieving spouse.[^51] Although, these rhetorical
questions are left ambiguous because there is no guarantee of the
spouse’s salvation,[^52] Paul’s exhortation remains, “Do not abandon the
marriage; there is always the possibility that you will win your
marriage partner.”[^53]

Conclusion
==========

In 1 Corinthians 7:10–16, Paul charges Christians not to initiate a
divorce, and to remain single (or reconcile) if they do; however, it is
possible that Paul acknowledges the liberty to remarry for the Christian
who receives a divorce from his or her unbelieving spouse. Because Paul
does not directly address remarriage in this passage, the liberty to
remarry is only a potential consequence of verse 15. Before conclusively
systematizing the so-called “Pauline privilege,” one must first
reconcile verses that seem—at least on the surface—to prohibit the
remarriage of a woman who has received a divorce, e.g., Matthew 5:32,
Luke 16:18, and Romans 7:3. Thus, Gordon Fee concludes, “This issue
[divorce and remarriage] is so complex, and the individual cases so
diverse, that this text with its singular focus on maintaining mixed
marriages (but allowing them to dissolve if the pagan initiates the
action) does not offer much help.”[^54] Yet, Paul’s positive command to
married Christians remains clear: stay married.

---

Bibliography
============

Ciampa, Roy E., and Brian S. Rosner. *The First Letter to the
Corinthians*. The Pillar New Testament Commentary. Grand Rapids: William
B. Eerdmans, 2010.

Cornes, Andrew. *Divorce & Remarriage: Biblical Principles & Pastoral
Practice*. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1993.

Dever, Mark. *Twelve Challenges Churches Face*. Wheaton: Crossway, 2008.

Edgar, Thomas. “Divorce and Remarriage for Adultery or Desertion.” In
House, 151–196.

Fee, Gordon D. *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*. New International
Commentary on the New Testament. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans,
1987.

Garland, David E. *1 Corinthians*. Baker Exegetical Commentary on the
New Testament. Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2003.

Heth, William A. “Another Look at the Erasmian View of Divorce and
Remarriage.” *Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society* 25, no. 3
(September 1982): 263–272.

———. “Remarriage for Adultery or Desertion.” In Strauss, *Remarriage
after Divorce in Today’s Church*, 59–83.

———. “A Response to Craig S. Keener.” In Strauss, *Remarriage after
Divorce in Today’s Church*, 127–131.

———. “A Response to Gordon J. Wenham.” In Strauss, *Remarriage after
Divorce in Today’s Church*, 43–47.

House, H. Wayne, ed. *Divorce and Remarriage: Four Christian Views*.
Downers Grove: InterVarsity, 1990.

Instone-Brewer, David. *Divorce and Remarriage in the Bible: The Social
and Literary Context*. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2002.

Keener, Craig S. “Remarriage for Circumstances beyond Adultery or
Desertion.” In Strauss, *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church*,
103–119.

Köstenberger, Andreas J., and David W. Jones. *God, Marriage, and
Family: Rebuilding the Biblical Foundation*. Wheaton: Crossway, 2004.

Laney, J. Carl. “No Divorce and No Remarriage.” In House, 15–54.

Luck, William F. *Divorce and Remarriage: Recovering the Biblical View*.
San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1987.

Murray, John. *Divorce*. Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed,
1961.

Strauss, Mark L. “Conclusion: Three Key Questions for You to Answer.” In
Strauss, *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church*, 137–141.

———, ed. *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church: 3 Views*.
Counterpoints: Church Life. Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006.

Thiselton, Anthony C. *The First Epistle to the Corinthians: A
Commentary on the Greek Text*. The New International Greek Testament
Commentary. Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2000.

Wenham, Gordon J. “No Remarriage after Divorce.” In Strauss, *Remarriage
after Divorce in Today’s Church*, 19–42.

———, and William E. Heth. *Jesus and Divorce*. Updated edition.
Carlisle: Paternoster, 1997.

[^1]: E.g., one collection provides four competing conclusions regarding divorce and remarriage. H. Wayne House, ed., *Divorce and Remarriage: Four Christian Views* (Downers Grove: InterVarsity, 1990).

[^2]: Unless otherwise specified, all Scripture references are from the English Standard Version (ESV).

[^3]: Gordon D. Fee, *The First Epistle to the Corinthians*, New International Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 1987), 291.

[^4]: Gordon J. Wenham and William E. Heth, *Jesus and Divorce*, Updated edition (Carlisle: Paternoster, 1997), 143.

[^5]: Fee, 291.

[^6]: David E. Garland, *1 Corinthians*, Baker Exegetical Commentary on the New Testament (Grand Rapids: Baker Academic, 2003), 282.

[^7]: Walter Bauer, *A Greek-English Lexicon of the New Testament*, rev. and ed. Frederick W. Danker, 3^rd^ ed. [BDAG] (Chicago: University of Chicago, 2000), s.v. “χωρίζω.”

[^8]: BDAG, s.v. “ἀφίημι.”

[^9]: David Instone-Brewer, *Divorce and Remarriage in the Bible: The Social and Literary Context* (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2002), 198–199. Cf. Garland, 281.

[^10]: Instone-Brewer, 199.

[^11]: Roy E. Ciampa and Brian S. Rosner, *The First Letter to the Corinthians*, The Pillar New Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2010), 292.

[^12]: Fee, 292.

[^13]: Ciampa and Rosner, 293.

[^14]: Garland, 283.

[^15]: Ciampa and Rosner, 291.

[^16]: Fee, 296.

[^17]: Wenham and Heth, 138 (emphasis added). Notably, William Heth changed his position from no-remarriage to remarriage in the case of adultery or desertion. William A. Heth, “A Response to Gordon J. Wenham,” in *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church: 3 Views*, ed. Mark L. Strauss, Counterpoints: Church Life (Grand Rapids: Zondervan, 2006), 43–45.

[^18]: John Murray, *Divorce* (Phillipsburg, NJ: Presbyterian and Reformed, 1961), 56; William F. Luck, *Divorce and Remarriage: Recovering the Biblical View* (San Francisco: Harper & Row, 1987), 165.

[^19]: Murray, 67.

[^20]: Anthony C. Thiselton, *The First Epistle to the Corinthians: A Commentary on the Greek Text*, The New International Greek Testament Commentary (Grand Rapids: William B. Eerdmans, 2000), 527.

[^21]: Ciampa and Rosner, 298.

[^22]: Garland, 284.

[^23]: Ibid., 285.

[^24]: Thiselton, 527; Garland, 286.

[^25]: Ciampa and Rosner, 296.

[^26]: Fee, 299.

[^27]: Ibid., 300.

[^28]: Ibid., 301.

[^29]: Garland, 288.

[^30]: Mark Dever, *Twelve Challenges Churches Face* (Wheaton: Crossway, 2008), 184.

[^31]: Garland, 289.

[^32]: J. Carl Laney, “No Divorce and No Remarriage,” in House, 42.

[^33]: Thomas Edgar, “Divorce and Remarriage for Adultery or Desertion,” in House, 190.

[^34]: Fee, 298–299.

[^35]: BDAG, s.v. “εἰρήνη.”

[^36]: BDAG, s.v. “σῴζω.”

[^37]: Cf. Fee, 306.

[^38]: BDAG, s.v. “δουλόω.”

[^39]: Luck, 16; Edgar, 189. Contra Garland, 290; Fee, 303.

[^40]: BDAG, s.v. “δέω.”

[^41]: Thiselton, 534.

[^42]: Each contributor in the following collections acknowledges the legal nature of the unbeliever’s divorce, yet they do not agree whether a Christian in such a situation has the liberty to remarry. H. Wayne House, ed., *Divorce and Remarriage: Four Christian Views*; Mark L. Strauss, ed., *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church: 3 Views*.

[^43]: See Garland, 534–537.

[^44]: Mark L. Strauss, “Conclusion: Three Key Questions for You to Answer,” in Strauss, *Remarriage after Divorce in Today’s Church*, 139.

[^45]: Heth, “Another Look at the Erasmian View of Divorce and Remarriage,” *Journal of the Evangelical Theological Society* 25, no. 3 (September 1982): 270.

[^46]: E.g., Garland, 291; Ciampa and Rosner, 302

[^47]: Instone-Brewer, 202.

[^48]: Ibid., 203.

[^49]: Fee, 304. Cf. Garland 292.

[^50]: Garland, 292.

[^51]: Fee, 304–305. Cf. Ciampa and Rosner, 305.

[^52]: Fee, 305.

[^53]: Garland, 295.

[^54]: Fee, 306.
